---
layout: post
title: "I've been diagnosed with ADHD"
tldr: "I've been diagnosed with ADHD. I ramble incoherently for a while and I might do some less rambling posts about it in the future."
tags: ["personal"]
date: 2016-08-31 02:22:38
---

**tl;dr: I've been diagnosed with ADHD. I ramble incoherently for a while and I
might do some less rambling posts about it in the future.**

As the title says, I've been recently diagnosed with ADHD and I thought I'd try
to be as open about it as possible and share my personal experiences with
mental illness. That being said, I am also adding the disclaimer, that I have
no training or special knowledge about it and that the fact that I have been
*diagnosed* with ADHD does not mean I am an authoritative source on its
effects, that this diagnoses is going to stick or that my experiences in any
way generalize to other people who got the same diagnosis.

This will hopefully turn into a bit of a series of blog posts and I'd like to
start it off with a general description of what lead me to look for a diagnosis
and treatment in the first place. Some of the things I am only touching on here
I might write more about in the future (see below for a non-exhaustive list).
Or not. I have not yet decided :)

---

It is no secret (it's actually kind of a running gag) that I am a serious
procrastinator. I always had trouble starting on something and staying with it;
my graveyard of unfinished projects is huge. For most of my life, however, this
hasn't been a huge problem to me. I was reasonably successful in compensating
for it with a decent amount of intelligence (arrogant as that sounds). I never
needed any homework and never needed to learn for tests in school and even
at university I only spent very little time on both. The homework we got was
short-term enough that procrastination was not a real danger, I finished it
quickly and whenever there *was* a longer-term project to finish (such as a
seminar-talk or learning for exams) I could cram for a night and get enough of
an understanding of things to do a decent job.

However, that strategy did not work for either my bachelor, nor my master
thesis, which predictably lead to both turning out a lot worse than I would've
wished for (I am not going to go into too much detail here). Self-organized
long-term work seemed next to impossible. This problem got *much* worse when I
started working full-time. Now almost all my work was self-organized and
long-term. Goals are set on a quarterly basis, the decision when and how and
how much to work is completely up to you. Other employers might frown at their
employees slacking off at work; where I work, it's almost expected. I was good
at being oncall, which is mainly reactive, short-term problem solving. But I
was (and am) completely dissatisfied with my project work. I felt that I did
not get nearly as much done as I should or as I would *want*. My projects in my
first quarter had very clear deadlines and I finished on time (I still
procrastinated, but at least at some point I sat down until I got it done. It
still meant staying at work until 2am the day before the deadline) but after
that it went downhill fast, with projects that needed to be done ASAP, but not
with a *deadline*. So I started slipping. I didn't finish my projects (in fact,
the ones that I didn't drop I am still not done with), I spent weeks doing
effectively nothing (I am not exaggerating here. I spent whole weeks not
writing a single line of code, closing a single bug or running a single
command, doing nothing but browse reddit, twitter and wasting my time in
similar ways. Yes, you can waste a week doing nothing, while sitting at your
desk), not being able to get myself to start working on anything and hating
myself for it.

And while I am mostly talking about work, this affected my personal life too.
Mail remains unopened, important errands don't get done, I am having trouble
keeping in contact with friends, because I can always write or visit them some
other time…

I tried (and had tried over the past years) several systems to organize myself
better, to motivate myself and to remove distractions. I was initially
determined to try to solve my problems on my own, that I did not really need
professional help. However, at some point, I realized that I won't be able to
fix this just by willing myself to it. I realized it in the final months of
my master thesis, but convinced myself that I [don't have time to fix it
properly, after all, I have to write my
thesis](https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAJWAAAAJDIwZTMwODMwLThkZTYtNDU4Ny04ZmI3LTE3N2E2MWYxZGVlMA.jpg).
I then kind of forgot about it (or rather: I procrastinated it) in the
beginning of starting work, because things where going reasonably well. But it
came back to me around the start of this year. After not finishing any of my
projects in the first quarter. And after telling my coworkers and friends of my
problems and them telling me that it's just impostor syndrome and a distorted
view of myself (I'll go into why they where wrong some more later, possibly).

I couldn't help myself and I couldn't get effective help from my coworkers. So,
in April, I finally decided to see a Psychologist. Previously the fear of
the potential cost (or the stress of dealing with how that works with my
insurance), the perceived complexity of finding one that is both accepting
patients that are only publicly insured and is specialized on my particular
kinds of issues and the perceived lack of time prevented me from doing so.
Apart from a general doubt about its effectiveness and fear of the
implications for my self-perception and world-view, of course.

Luckily one of the employee-benefits at my company is free and uncomplicated
access to a Mental Health (or "Emotional well-being", what a fun euphemism)
provider. It only took a single E-Mail and the meetings happen around 10 meters
away from my desk. So I started seeing a psychologist on a regular basis (on
average probably every one and a half weeks or so) and talking about my issues.
I explained and described my problems and it went about as good as I feared;
they tried to convince me that the real issue isn't my performance, but my
perception of it (and I concede that I still have trouble coming up with hard,
empirical evidence to present to people. Though it's performance review season
right now. As I haven't done anything of substance in the past 6 months, maybe
I will finally get that evidence…) and they tried to get me to adopt more
systems to organize myself and remove distractions. All the while, I got worse
and worse. My inability to get even the most basic things done or to
concentrate even for an hour, even for five minutes, on anything of substance,
combined with the inherent social isolation of moving to a new city and
country, lead me into deep depressive episodes.

Finally, when my Psychologist in a session tried to get me to write down what
was essentially an [Unschedule](http://www.neilfiore.com/now-habit-schedules/)
(a system I knew about from reading "The Now Habit" myself when working at my
bachelor thesis and that I even had moderate success with; for about two
weeks), I broke down. I told them that I do not consider this a valuable use of
these sessions, that I tried systems before, that I tried *this particular*
system before and that I can find these kind of lifestyle advise on my own, in
my free time. That the reason I was coming to these sessions was to get
systematic, medical, professional help of the kind that I *can't* get from
books. So we agreed, at that point, to pursue a diagnosis, as a precondition
for treatment.

Which, basically, is where we are at now. The diagnostic process consisted of
several sessions of questions about my symptoms, my childhood and my life in
general, of filling out a couple of diagnostic surveys and having my siblings
fill them out too (in the hope that they can fill in some of the blanks in my
own memory about my childhood) and of several sessions of answering more
questions from more surveys. And two weeks ago, I officially got the diagnosis
ADHD. And the plan to attack it by a combination of therapy and medication (the
latter, in particular, is *really* hard to get from books, for some reason :) ).

I just finished my first day on
[Methylphenidate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methylphenidate) (the active
substance in Ritalin), specifically Concerta. And though this is definitely
*much* too early to actually make definitive judgments on its effects and
effectiveness, at least for this one day I was feeling really great and
actively happy. Which, coincidentally, helped me to finally start on this post,
to talk about mental health issues; a topic I've been wanting to talk about
ever since I started this blog (again), but so far didn't really felt I could.

---

As I said, this is hopefully the first post in a small ongoing series. I am
aware that it is long, rambling and probably contentious. It definitely won't get
all my points across and will change the perception some people have of me (I
can hear you thinking how all of this doesn't really speak "mental illness",
how it seems implausible that someone with my CV would actually, objectively,
get nothing done and how I am a drama queen and shouldn't try to solve my
problems with dangerous medication). It's an intentionally broad overview of my
process and its main purpose is to "out" myself publicly and create starting
points for multiple, more specific, concise, interesting and convincing posts
in the future. Things I might, or might not talk about are

* My specific symptoms and how this has and still is influencing my life (and
  how, yes, this is actual an *illness*, not just a continuous label). In
  particular, there are things I wasn't associating with ADHD, which turn out
  to be relatively tightly linked.
* How my medication is specifically affecting me and what it does to those
  symptoms. I can not overstate how *fascinated* I am with today's experience.
  I was wearing a visibly puzzled expression all day because I couldn't figure
  out what was happening. And then I couldn't stop smiling. :)
* Possibly things about my therapy? I really don't know what to expect about
  that, though. Therapy is kind off the long play, so it's much harder to
  evaluate and talk about its effectiveness.
* Why I consider us currently to be in the Middle Ages of mental health and why
  I think that in a hundred years or so people will laugh at how we currently
  deal with it. And possibly be horrified.
* My over ten years (I'm still young, mkey‽) of thinking about my own mental
  health and mental health in general and my thoughts of how mental illness
  interacts with identity and self-definition.
* How much I *loathe* the term "impostor syndrome" and why I am (still)
  convinced that I don't get enough done, even though I can't produce empirical
  evidence for that and people try to convince me otherwise. And what it does
  to you, to need to take the "I suck" side of an argument and still don't have
  people believe you.

Let me know, what you think :)
